the deserts of Egypt are always in
motion they roll and swell eternally
shifting through wind and time rising
from the desert rock and the marks of
man
[Music]
remnants of their tools remain but the
intellect that conceived these marvels
is shrouded in mystery new research
sheds light on some of the most
persistent questions about what the
ancients News I've always been
fascinated by ancient civilizations this
is a fascination driven above all by the
grand monuments the ancients have left
behind but the more I study those
monuments the more I learn about them
the more my mind keeps returning to the
same simple but perplexing questions
what was the science what was the
technology that made these monuments
possible where did it come from and what
were its legacies
they say faith can move mountains well
in the case of the ancient Egyptians it
was their faith that made them move one
mountain to build another to do that
they invented not tools but clever
techniques and methods
[Music]
I flew to Egypt looking for remnants of
their ancient past to uncover something
new about the ancient legacy
[Music]
following the legendary Nile was like
stepping back in time entering an
ancient maze of mystery that has led us
to the tangible examples of the ancients
knowledge and insights
the earliest Egyptians lived in a world
without science in a world full of
mysteries with few explanation
their legacy began 7,000 years ago when
they sought to harness the Nile every
year the river flooded following the
snowmelt in the ethiopian mountains
1,200 miles away
for the most part the flood was a
blessing because during drought time
there was starvation but the flood
brought ample crops and life mind.you
97% of Egypt today is desert and the
Nile was and is the main source of water
thinking about their environment the
ancient Egyptians began to develop
methods utilizing nature to their
advantage mimicking the natural basins
that retained water when the river
receded they built canals to direct the
natural flow even to distant fields
whether now left behind the
nutrient-rich soil once the water
evaporated the Egyptians invented the
world's first irrigation system and the
Nile became the key to their success
with a lot of time on their hands to
think and wonder the ancient egyptians
detected natural rules and cycles the
predominant force in their lives was the
river
in a time before the era of hieroglyphs
we know that the ancients tried to
predict its flood levels by carving
markers into the rocks given their total
dependence on the Nile the Egyptians
needed a way to forecast its behavior
eventually they built this pit designed
to trap the rising water they developed
a no lammeter a simple yet effective
method it could take various forms but
here on elephantine island it as one it
was a row of steps with the height in
cubits carved into the wall from the
height the river reached they knew what
the year ahead had installed a height of
18 cubits meant famine 24 meant
abundance and 27 foretold disaster the
Noah lammeter was a sign of life
following the cycles of nature they
formerly divided their year into three
seasons first came the flooding season
then the outflowing season of sowing and
harvest and finally the inevitable
drought that lasted until the lifecycle
of the Nile repeated itself
the ancients divided each season into
four months with the moon defining each
month as a cycle of 29 to 30 days from
their Sumerian neighbors the ancient
Egyptians had already adopted a 360 day
calendar but the moon is a marker turned
out not to be precise enough at least
not when it came to predicting the flood
[Music]
eventually they looked for another
solution one that would have
far-reaching consequences step-by-step
they tried to find ways to order their
world and while discovering the rules
and cycles of the night sky the
Egyptians noticed a particular star
Sirius or septet as they called it rose
once a year in mid-july around the
beginning of the flood season from then
onward this night marked the ancients
new year an annual cycle of 365 days
just like our year today their desire to
divide the day and calibrate time
motivated the Egyptians to create
markers of their own I went to see this
3500 year old marker in Cairo though
across Egypt obelisks like these were
already in use 2,000 years earlier like
giant sundials the ancients could tell
from their shadow what time it was but
how do you know what time it is when no
obelisk is nearby by around 1500 BC the
Egyptians had invented a portable
sundial the principle was simple they
pointed an l-shaped scale bar toward the
Sun to create a shadow for accuracy a
plumb bob helped keep the instrument
level if held horizontally and pointed
directly at the Sun the shadow matched
the width of the scale bar and where the
shadow falls tells you what time it is
you have in other words a clock
[Music]
for the first time in history the
ancient Egyptians formally divided the
day even though not in two hours but
into 24 parts just like we do today as
they gained more insights into nature's
rules and cycles they remained one
mystery to unravel the Sun died in the
evening could be reborn the following
day the Nile flooded each year it's
waters bringing life as the waters
receded they followed death from this
natural cycle the ancients must have
concluded there was more to life than
met the eye there were two sides to the
coin on this side life on the other the
afterlife but there was a catch just as
you needed a body for this life so you
needed a body for the afterlife ideally
your own and intact and that would have
a ripple effect
in the early days the Egyptians buried
their dead inside the earth wrapped in
linen beneath the shifting desert sand
but sandstorms would regularly devastate
their grave sites and scatter the
remains of the ancestors across the
desert floor destroying the bodies they
so desperately needed because without an
intact body they believed there was no
afterlife
so they began to find other methods and
dug deeper into the desert rock creating
safer resting places that is for those
who could afford them tomb construction
followed a basic design they dug a shaft
with one or more chambers at the bottom
once the deceased was placed inside the
shaft was sealed with sand or a heavy
rock and the entrance covered with mud
bricks this is one of the oldest mud
brick tombs remaining and while this is
a large one they took on individual
sizes and shapes whether square or
beehive the covers expressed the
Egyptians idea of the primeval earth
mound from which all life had once
emerged and from which the dead were
resurrected as longevity became an issue
they replaced my brick for regal burials
the ancients now use stones still shaped
like mud bricks but they were more
durable with stone the Egyptians built
among the oldest super structures in
human history
these are mustapha's flat rectangular
tombs an Arabic term for stone bench
mastaba x' became a mark of status
I noticed here at Giza that with time
the stone blocks became larger and the
tombs more elaborate
[Music]
this was a burial shaft I could see that
the ancient craftsmen were true masters
the high level of finish makes it hard
to believe they're 5,000 years old at
the end of the shaft a mastaba like this
contained one or more burial chambers
depending upon wealth a rectangular
superstructure above the burial shaft
contained a corridor a chapel and
another important feature a set up the
opposition a met with the chief
Egyptologist of the Giza Plateau mr.
Mansoor
to look inside a mastaba it is the
shadow or the corridor which leads to
the chairman of the tool yes but you
could see how important this tomb was by
the level of finish and architectural
detail is before the Chapel of the tomb
you can see a corridor and this corridor
if we looked on the ceiling you will see
that they built it in a vaulted ceiling
massive stone blocks form the walls in a
saddle roof cleverly applying the right
triangle the ancient engineers
calculated the arch and then chipped
away the stone to create the vaulted
ceiling it was one of the earliest uses
of geometry
this friend order they've been in that
they bought the oil paintings were the
daily life scenes mr. Manso pointed out
that the ancients took gifts and
material belongings to their grave but
that wall paintings replaced the world
they lived in these images were as good
as the real thing
depicting cherished activities like
winemaking and details of their daily
lives as farmers each picture a magical
eternal offering expressed in art should
contain a statue of the certain table
was empty but traditionally the statue
that resided here offered the sole
refuge in case the body was stolen now
where is this a flaw period the
afterlife is here is a big shovel the
most holy place inside the tomb
can we have a look in here please what
would happen in the chapel this is the
most sacred place in the sudden inside
East or in each in the other tubes which
is comprises the fall stop the first
told all the chapel was built for this
fall stone
why is a colorful stone well possible
because I think the ancient Egyptians
were loved the images and this is the
image of a rear door following the
ancients love of images mr. Mansur
explained the false door mimicked a real
door through which the deceased could
return to his life to visit with family
and friends and receive their offerings
in an adjoining tomb I found a powerful
presence the souls doorway and its
resident statue along with the soul the
Egyptians believed a person was
comprised of the body the personality
the mortality and the name without an
intact body or at least a statue for the
soul to inhabit a person didn't have a
shadow and therefore didn't exist their
belief however was not the only
motivator ego and politics were powerful
forces to
[Music]
it appears the time was ripe for someone
to think outside the box
Mostafa x' were built to house the
bodies of the dead for all time and with
the passing of the years they became
larger and more ornate then someone had
a new idea modern Cairo today is home to
30% of Egypt's entire population like in
ancient times life still revolves around
the Nile and farming still remains a
central part of it
the ancients used basic tools yet they
developed creative and intelligent
methods like the world's first
irrigation system to produce enough food
to sustain an entire nation but the
Egyptians capitalized on yet another
gift from the Nile one that has left its
permanent mark in world history papyrus
the Egyptians invented one of the first
portable recording mediums in the
ancient world to make a sheet of papyrus
they cut the inner pith of the stalk
into strips then they'd soak them and
arrange the pulp strips at right angles
[Music]
pounding began the fiber fusing process
heavy weights further fused the plant
cells after forcing the air out reducing
the thickness by about 75% air drying
compressed the fibers by another 5%
much of what we know about Egyptian tomb
construction comes from papyrus records
but to appreciate these marvels there's
nothing like seeing the real thing so I
went to Sakura where it all began around
2600 BC Imhotep physician and architect
of the Pharaohs oza came up with a tomb
that was fit for a king he had cared for
the Pharaohs body in this life now he
built him a home for the afterlife
Imhotep was considered a genius because
he took mastaba design to the next level
literally sparking a whole new era
[Music]
imhotep started with a mastaba which he
expanded on two sides and built from the
ground up a four step pyramid around it
while he was at it
he superimposed another even bigger
construction over the first until he had
created a tomb with six steps
reaching over 200 feet into the sky the
subterranean chambers he connected by a
three and a half mile long maze of
shafts and tunnels really unbelievable
if you think about it we have no record
of what went on in in hot apps head but
his innovative design really speaks for
itself
had he not created an image of the sun's
rays or was it a staircase leading zoe's
has sold heaven wood towards his
afterlife in hot apps Step Pyramid
stunned the ancient world and Zoe's as
Tim became Egypt's first pyramid
trial and there are success and failure
whatever learning curves in hotep
successes underwent we don't know fact
is he sparked a whole new trend how many
attempts failed we'll never know half a
century later either King honey or King
sniffer who took pyramid design to new
heights experts don't know which one was
responsible to build higher they
experimented with the square base at my
doom
but the sky was the limit and after
relocating the gravesite to Dasher
sniffer who started a new even more
ambitious project at first it seemed to
work except 1/3 into the construction
sniff whose ambition was curbed by the
slope one theory is that the tremendous
static weight may have caused cracks on
the interior walls so they lowered the
angle earning his project the name bent
pyramid experts believe it was because
of this imperfection that Sneferu
ordered a new pyramid talk about
ambition and determination for the red
pyramid they copied the square base and
the new angle of the bent pyramid for
overall better proportions it may look
like trial and error but over time they
learned to carefully calculate their
constructions the Rhind papyrus dates
from 1650 BC while it's a copy from an
earlier document it may still be older
because the era of pyramid construction
had ended around 150 years earlier
it's a 15 foot long scroll this part
shows that the ancients came up with a
formula to calculate the perfect
proportions of a pyramid and that they
had a basic understanding of the
principles underlying the Pythagorean
theorem a thousand years before
Pythagoras was even born
[Music]
what's neferu had created was the first
true pyramid four equal triangles on a
square base now I wanted to see how they
had solved the weight issues of the
interior a corridor leads into two
antechambers in one burial chamber
they're located in the center about 90
feet below the entrance
[Music]
given the size and weight of these
blocks the precision with which the
Egyptian set them is really impressive
[Music]
so this was how they distributed the
massive weight
they built what architects call a core
build ceiling this one is over 40 feet
high
each tiered projects out just a few
inches from the one below until they
meet at the top Wow then the corridor
ascends for a few yards leading into the
burial chamber here in the middle of the
pyramid you've got millions of pounds of
rock all around you it's like you're
buried alive
[Music]
the robbers have long since cleaned this
place out but the air in here smells
like it hasn't changed in thousands of
years no fresh air gets in through this
narrow passage
although the ceiling is 50 feet high
stuffy doesn't come close it's well over
90 degrees and the bats in here laced
the air with a strong smell of ammonia
phew I can't tell you how good it feels
to be out in the open air again today
this is called the Red Pyramid but
originally it was white covered in the
glistening limestone casing to a height
of 340 feet but the sky was the limit
soon the father would be outdone by the
Sun you may know the expressions if you
can dream it you can do it and that only
the sky's the limit when I visited the
ancient sites of Egypt I saw just how
true these efforts were a long long time
ago the ancient Egyptians created some
of the most enduring structures in human
history
especially once they mastered the six
major construction aspects that are
consistent for all 80 or so pyramids
they've built the first principle is the
square base to get a perfect square they
mark the four corners of the pyramid
something they probably did with strings
precision is important because if the
sides aren't exactly even you'll run
into problems higher up in a second
phase they built a rough stepped core
like here at Giza outside Cairo where
it's possible to see the various layers
much of what remains today is this core
this one is the biggest pyramid of them
all it is the tomb of pharaoh keops who
ruled egypt in the middle of the 25th
century bc rising almost 500 feet above
the desert floor this was the tallest
building in the world for nearly five
thousand years nobody knows exactly what
their techniques were because over time
the traces of their construction methods
have been erased eternally sparking new
theories
the third feature is the location and
orientation of the pyramid since Kings
neferu all pyramids now faced east-west
equated the life and death of the King
to the rising and Setting Sun orienting
the pyramid in the right direction seems
to have been no problem for the ancients
because the mean error on most pyramids
is less than one degree selecting the
location also included the aspect of
sufficient construction material for the
foundation and the inner core they used
as many limestone blocks as possible
from the immediate site experts have
done the math a pyramid like this
required nearly two and a half million
stone blocks a virtual mountain
[Music]
here in the pyramid quarry you can still
see where they cut the core blocks out
of the bedrock even today querying is
hard work and takes a lot of muscle both
human and mechanical the comparison
between our modern equipment and their
techniques makes their accomplishments
appear even more amazing at an ancient
quarry in Aswan and the south of Egypt I
came to appreciate their determination
[Music]
this is a block of dollar I'd and
believe it or not it was all the
Egyptians needed to quarry huge blocks
of granite they've used it much like a
sledgehammer pounding away to the head
holes like these and eventually they'd
have a trench the work must have been
extremely tedious but it was very
effective
it's just a question of doing the work
and other people hauling li blocks away
to the pyramid site
I met with Dennis stocks an expert and
author of a book on stone working
technology in ancient Egypt it's a
question of a grid pattern to isolate
blocks ready to extract them to put into
the pyramid he explained how they moved
these blocks to build the pyramid core
[Music]
given the different sizes they probably
used various methods in some cases
they'd probably drag the blocks while in
others they used sleds and wooden
rollers with simple wood levers they
most likely set the larger blocks in
place at the top the rocks are much
smaller and could probably be set by
hand in the fourth phase of construction
they filled in smaller stones to shape
the actual pyramid the trick was not so
much the perfect shape of each block but
the overall height of each course which
had to be absolutely even and level as
you can see the pyramids are built out
of stones of all different shapes and
sizes some as large as a truck others
the size of a fridge all fitted exactly
together but as if that wasn't hard
enough the builders had to maintain a
constant angle from one course of stones
to the next only that way could they
give the facade the smoothness of a
piece of glass and maintain the angles
with a razor-sharp precision
the fifth aspect of pyramid construction
was the right angle the slope and its
proportion to the square base this was
crucial in terms of durability finally
there were the white smoothly finished
limestone casing blocks in most cases
they've been stripped away as the
pyramids themselves became quarries the
cap on key Ops son Caffrey's tomb is a
remnant of that I knew that Dennis had
done some research on the casing blocks
I met him at the fair Roenick village in
Giza where he'd set up a workshop to
demonstrate ancient stone working
techniques when I arrived Denis was just
setting up a limestone block the tools
he prepared was surprisingly simple
I was curious to see how they'd used
them Jack come and have a look at this
over here what have we got here Dennis
well this block of stone is similar to
the tank that they would use in the
Great Pyramid particularly for the
casing block how did they get the blocks
smooth enough to serve as a casing well
to start to get you smooth we would use
a tool like this this is a copper chisel
and the copper came from copper ore
which comes from the Sanger Dennis told
me that the ancients used three
naturally occurring materials copper ore
flint and sand from copper ore they made
chisels adzes borers and drills I always
thought that copper was a very soft
metal well how can you cut stone with
copper ah
now the secret with this is that this is
hammered told not like a modern steel
chisels and that hardens the edge if
it's left to cool naturally okay and
then you can cut the stone yes it's
quite simple to do we just get the
chisel put the edge on and then
gradually chip away by altering the
angle of the chisel in order to get a
clean cut along the slope and that gives
you a cut that's smooth enough to build
the casing stones yes eventually you
would get it quite flat but then there's
another technique they could use which
is
using a flint scraper has a sharp edge
along there and can be used like this
just angle it at the stone and gradually
scrape away the high points like so now
Jack why don't you have a go yourself
it's quite soft isn't it yes you can
yeah and so with this thing you just you
just evenly you can gradually get that
even down until he gets a smooth surface
polishing is one thing but how do you
know when you've got the finished
product how do you know that your
surface is absolutely flat well let me
show you first of all they needed an
accurate tool to test the surfaces to
see whether it was flat or not really
what it amounts to if you just hold up
from your jack and stretch that out
tight on the surface like of that now
well this is a three rods that are all
the same length now this is extremely
important so about when the string is
taut you can check underneath the string
with the rod to see if there are any
high spots like so if we touch the
string we know that there's a bump right
there yeah if the string lifts up like
that you know that there's a bump
unbelievable this technique was really
clever but if you think of the millions
of stone blocks that required such
detail
I was skeptical as to how effective it
had been in the field so I challenged
Dennis to a little experiment we walk
along this way you'll see that blocks
are in a line and they seem pretty level
with each other how did they keep them
so level well they have to use a means
of testing them so we'll test them and
see how good they are let's use the old
leveling tool again the rods and strings
you place your end on that block there
and I'll try this block here and we'll
try your block first with the testing
rod oh god there but this is the bit
here how's this level here oh yes you've
got to have nothing but admiration for
them so they've got it exactly right
absolutely right so the blocks are level
but that wasn't enough for the pyramid
to remain stable the blocks had to be
horizontal Dennis had bought another
ancient tool now we can use this a-frame
to check whether the block is truly
horizontal horizontal like a like a
surface of water yeah in fact we can use
the surface of water to check that the
frame is accurate and we do this by
marking a line behind the hanging plumb
line so if your measurement is flat and
this won't always have absolutely
vertically and then you know the rock is
horizontal so how how is that lamp it's
bang on it's absolutely right in the
middle it's very good very good but
that's one thing I mean if you know the
brook is horizontal that's fine but
surely you also need to know whether the
sides are vertical
yeah that's right jack but they had
another tool for this purpose and there
was only one place to test it now this
is one of the casing blocks that once
covered the entire pyramid that's right
jack because this casing block has to
fit to its neighbor the vertical face
has to be truly vertical and they could
test it with this particular tool which
is called an f frame and by the way this
is the only place on the plateau that we
can test whether a casing blocks surface
is truly vertical this is a simple tool
so long as this distance is equal to
this distance and the plumb line is
touching both the ends then we can say
that the surface is truly vertical so
how's he doing jack it's doing pretty
well it's then we can show that the
surface is vertical pretty simple huh
well you've got it right again jack
but who were they the ancient Egyptians
were foremost farmers if the pharaohs
were able to assemble a massive
workforce until now it was believed that
the source of that manpower was slavery
but new evidence suggests otherwise the
pyramids were not built on the backs of
slaves but rather on devotion and
commitment today aswan the ancient
capital of Nubia in southern Egypt is a
destination for all who are eager to
explore the Nile in ancient times Aswan
was first and foremost the source of
special stones for a special purpose
inside the tombs
[Applause]
even today the stone found here is
prized
5,000 years ago granite blocks like
these were quarried and shipped down the
river
while the quarry gangs toiled away
moving one mountain to build another
other crews worked here at the pyramid
Harbor it was called a harbor because it
was believe it or not full of water
connected by canal to the Nile it was a
scene of heaving activity like a modern
container port fruit was here that all
the fine stones arrived by boat here the
stones were unloaded and then hauled up
the hill to the pyramids
the ancients knew that the angle of the
ramps was crucial between six and seven
degrees was perfect to defy gravity from
the harbor the stones were loaded onto
our sleds which will then hold up the
hill lubricated with powdered lime and
water reducing the friction by 90% this
is no hill you want to hold a rock up I
wondered who the people were who dragged
heavy stones up to the pyramids day
after day during the twenty to thirty
years of construction that it took to
build these giants so I went to the foot
of the Giza Plateau
where a graveyard is being excavated it
is the resting place of those who worked
on the pyramids nearby
the graves provide a glimpse of the
workers lifestyle and hindered the
social and economic importance pyramid
construction held for the entire nation
dr. who asked what to the tombs tell us
this is the first time actually that we
know about the life of the workmen who
built the pyramids before that we know a
lot about nobles and officials and kings
and queens but nothing about the common
people who represent 80% of the nation
in that time and not to say how US
Secretary General of Antiquities met
with me to share the latest discoveries
how was it that the Egyptians managed to
get so many people working on such a
colossal enterprise was this a system of
forced labor of coercion was it more
system of cooperation you have to
understand one important thing that the
pyramid was the national project of the
whole nation the whole country the 1
million and 600,000 who actually was the
number of population in Egypt and in
that time dedicated their life to build
that pyramid because it is for the king
who is actually the gut
so it's certainly not an army of forced
slaves no we believe that the number of
the workmen was only ten thousand
workmen maybe one-third was actually a
permanent welcome and work for the king
permanently and there is will be workmen
young people who came through the
support of the household in the Delta
and then apparition country to what has
been assumed evidence emerges that the
basic workforce the muscle power in the
construction of the pyramids were not
slaves but devoted farmers every family
had to sink there sure you know like
today if you go to any village in Upper
Egypt or lower Asia they do like the
time of building the pyramid if you try
to build your house you'll find that
every day every family in the village
will bring you food they'll dig in the
pyramid was the same like this what
about the Nile and the annual flooding
that occurred did that affect the work
on the pyramids it does but it helped in
working at pyramid because you in the
flood completely cover issue there is no
work for anyone what you've described
here is really a small city ten thousand
people is a lot of people how did they
organize that a group consists of two
thousand workmen and they divide the
crew the two gangs each gang consists of
one thousand workmen each gang had a
name like a friends of who food mayn't
our eyes drunk each group had an
overseer then the whole ten thousand
were organized by groups by gangs by
small groups then this organization
could be very easy they had a big area
like a canteen or for feeding all the
workmen you have all storage facilities
to store all the equipment the tools
because each workman cannot own a tool
the tools were owned by the government
they have people who take care of their
clothes they have people take care of
their food they have people who really
prepare everything for them like a
pyramid yeah why do you wonder all the
time about building the pyramid the
administration of building
theremin is more genius to anyone
definitely building the pyramid itself
and this why the pyramid Belt Egypt
because building this pyramid made them
to know about our technology and science
[Music]
[Applause]
I came to realize how much of what the
ancients knew reverberates across time
while walking through modern Aswan I
happened to pass by a construction site
where the techniques were strikingly
similar to the ancient methods simple
tools muscle power and knowledge passed
down for generations were all they
needed to in case of slope strings are
still used to keep the surface level
they're like a slice out of time I saw
what it may have looked like thousands
of years ago in ancient Egypt
the Egyptian faith in an afterlife
spurred not only science and technology
but Commerce like modern Cairo the
workers village required a huge amount
of supplies on a daily basis
[Music]
many sought to fill those needs and as
their belief radiated out beyond the
Royal gravesites it touched every aspect
of Egyptian daily life more and more
people turn to supplying the demand or
generating a demand of their own
[Music]
undertaking in all aspects associated
with it became a major industry incense
bombs anoints that had been the Kings
prerogatives also desired by the masses
[Applause]
believed to be the scent of the Gods
perfumed oils were applied to the skin
for both cosmetic and medicinal purposes
and also used in the mummification
process so you could say that perfume
was yet another invention we owe to the
Egyptians belief in the afterlife
they also created one of the world's
most enduring fascinations in the Cairo
Museum I saw some of the stunning
results of the ancient Undertaker's art
and science though they are shocking in
this stark reality the mummies provide
an invaluable record of the beliefs the
science and the lives of the ancient
Egyptians six feet tall 90 years old the
father of a hundred children during a
reign of 70 years the legendary ramses
ii surpassed all Egyptian rulers the
mummification process during queen nijem
its time included the tucking of Natron
a naturally occurring salt in packages
under the skin and into the body's
hollows when she was found and
transferred up the Nile to Cairo the
nattramn that had once dehydrated her
body absorbs the moisture on the river
causing her dried skin to burst king ii
in roz mummy tells of a violent world
which he left following a head wound
sustained in battle
Amenhotep the first his grandson is
resting in the shroud adorned with
flower garlands
just like today flowers were a token of
love the mummies tell us that the
Egyptians set broken bones performed
amputations and suffered like many of us
from arthritis
[Music]
these silent messengers bear witness to
a mastery of technology and an
astonishing depth of knowledge
nearby I found another ancient marvel a
hollowed-out granite block the ancients
coffin or sarcophagus the surface was
astonishingly smooth cleverly they cut
the lid from the same block an amazing
piece of expert craftsmanship and
precision it really makes you wonder
working granite requires a lot of
mechanical force where we use pneumatic
equipment well the Egyptians needed was
a simple yet nifty technique the barren
environment of the desert inspired the
ancient Egyptians to create colorful
images be it for this life or the
afterlife in their world flowers took on
a special meaning records from 2200 BC
showed that it was in ancient Egypt
where the first ornamental gardens were
created more than 1,500 years before the
fabled Hanging Gardens of Babylon solely
a prerogative of royalty some say the
ancient gardens were an expression of
the God kings might so powerful he could
grow flowers where nature did not but
the ancients saw more in them they were
an image of rebirth and regeneration
tokens of love and worship for the
passage from this life to the afterlife
placed with the mummies inside their
coffins flowers were believed to protect
them for an eternity and granite so they
believed provided the ultimate insurance
on the Mohs scale of one to ten granite
is a seven making it at least as hard as
steel just how they were able to hollow
out a piece of rock this hard was a
question for ancient technology expert
Dennis stocks you know one of the most
difficult things that the Egyptians have
to do the very mystifying process is how
did they drill the holes in solid rock
anyway this is the way that they did it
first of all they had a copper tube
which had a shaft of wood written
partway into it so that there's a space
in the tube underneath
then they could get the Jew in position
and the cutting agent is just common
desert sound so that's you're just
pouring sand in there so that the copper
has a has a sharp edge to cut yes now
we've got a longbow here with a rope on
which has be given a double turn around
the shaft now there's only one
components are put in place can we put
the top cap still not now this is just
to put in position for the shaft to
rotate rotating while the bottom rotates
in the hole so if you'd like to take
hold of this so this hole this is what
yes and I don't want any pressure on and
while the two operators turn the drill
the sound is now steadily and slowly but
surely crossing its way right through
the stop and the only Lily to factories
our strength and the length of the
copper tube so it's a very good
technique and of course it's very very
economical why because you're always
really the circumference of the tube out
the core can be knocked out later and
you're left with a hole super technology
really is
[Music]
with basic tools but masterful
application
the ancient Egyptians created world
wonders
[Music]
and while their knowledge and experience
grew the craftsmanship of the pyramids
went downhill
[Music]
as industries expanded and diversified
social classes emerged that were no
longer dependent on the royal family
[Music]
some historians also believe that wars
famines and a power shift to the south
contributed to the decline but it took
another thousand years before the
ancient Egyptians were dealt the final
blow a new faith arose and while it also
acknowledged the concept of a life after
death it argued that you didn't need a
body to enjoy it Christianity swept
through Egypt followed by other
religions arising in over 3000 year old
tradition in only a few centuries
eclipsing a culture and a lifestyle that
have been shaped by the pyramids in
their quest for an eternal life they
leave behind a legacy of basic geometry
rudimentary science and seminal
technologies preparing the ground for
intellectual growth elsewhere when we
think of the great intellectually and
scientifically advanced cultures of the
ancient Western world we tend to
concentrate on Greece and Rome but both
cultures achieve their greatness thanks
in part to what the ancient Egyptians
knew their knowledge did not remain
trapped in these desert sands but
spilled out into the wider world beyond
the shores of the Nile from where it
eventually reached us reminding us in
light of our own achievements in
technology and science that we stand in
awe on the shoulders of giants known as
the Egyptians
[Music]
you